# Books

## The View from Nowhere, Thomas Nagle (02 JUL 2026 - 20 JUL 2026)

Kaitlyn gave me this. Written in the pedantic style of old philosophers. Nagle makes a very big deal about the separation of objective and subjective reality. Basically qualia. He says things that I find silly, like that "being square" is objective, but "being red" is subjective because of how humans percieve colors. I don't get it. From a pure physicalist/realist/reductionist point of view (me!) this is just human sensors diserning a frequency band of electromagnetic radiation. Big deal. "The fealing of red" may be a qualia thing and you may be skeptical of assuming that other humans experience it like you do, etc. But red is just what we humans call a 620-750nm wavelength. What's the big deal? Another silly one is when he presents the argument that existence depends on a mind to percieve. I like Feynman's poem about waves on the beach wasting energy for eons with nothing living to witness them, and the final line about being atoms with conciousness. I do like how Nagle presents all of the top known arguments around each topic. It's far too rigorous for me though. Much of it seems obvious without wasting time pondering things like whether I'm a brain in a vat or the universe is a simulation or whatever else... By the way, I'm writing this as a stream of thought while still reading the book. The section on "Freedom" is pretty interesting. Whether free will exists. I like how he phrases it as something like, "Agents can no longer be thought of as taking action in the world, but instead they are merely part of the flux of causality." Something like that: not taking action _on_ the world, but _in_ the world, subject to physics like everything else. The separation of _prudence_ vs. _impulse_, of _values_ vs. _preferences_. The examples of choosing food from a menu by letting your cravings in impulse take over -- easy to think of yourself as an _observer_. He doesn't mention them, but the experiments on split-brain people where something is shown to one eye (e.g. a key) and a set of objects to the other. The language half picks up the key and invents a reason for choosing it. The subject _feels_ like they made a free choice and can explain why. The conscious as an _observer_ of subconscious decisions, at least impulsive ones. The last couple of chapters talk about ethics and morality and the meaning of life and death. I like how he spells out the cataloge of different arguments. It strikes me that Nathan is a "utilitarian" when it comes to morality. Anything for the common good, even when it tramples the individual. He'd like the show Plurabis. Nagel tells an interesting story about a spider living in a urinal for months at his school. It was unable to get out and made a miserable living in there. He tried to save it by letting it out, but it died. That was the first time in the book that he used an interesting concrete example that was fun to read (a page and a half). Everything else in the book is painfully abstract. I did enjoy the book, but it could have been written in a less dry, much more entertaining way.
